Article 17.

The decision shall be notified to the provider or its authorised representative.

The notification shall contain the conclusions of the assessment of the quality management system and the reasoned assessment decision.

3.3.

The quality management system as approved shall continue to be implemented and maintained by the provider so that it remains adequate and efficient.

3.4.

Any intended change to the approved quality management system or the list of AI systems covered by the latter shall be brought to the attention of the notified body by the provider.

The proposed changes shall be examined by the notified body, which shall decide whether the modified quality management system continues to satisfy the requirements referred to in point 3.2 or whether a reassessment is necessary.

The notified body shall notify the provider of its decision. The notification shall contain the conclusions of the examination of the changes and the reasoned assessment decision.

4.   Control of the technical documentation.

4.1.

In addition to the application referred to in point 3, an application with a notified body of their choice shall be lodged by the provider for the assessment of the technical documentation relating to the AI system which the provider intends to place on the market or put into service and which is covered by the quality management system referred to under point 3.

4.2.

The application shall include:

(a)

the name and address of the provider;

(b)

a written declaration that the same application has not been lodged with any other notified body;

(c)

the technical documentation referred to in Annex IV.

4.3.

The technical documentation shall be examined by the notified body. Where relevant, and limited to what is necessary to fulfil its tasks, the notified body shall be granted full access to the training, validation, and testing data sets used, including, where appropriate and subject to security safeguards, through API or other relevant technical means and tools enabling remote access.

4.4.

In examining the technical documentation, the notified body may require that the provider supply further evidence or carry out further tests so as to enable a proper assessment of the conformity of the AI system with the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2. Where the notified body is not satisfied with the tests carried out by the provider, the notified body shall itself directly carry out adequate tests, as appropriate.

4.5.

Where necessary to assess the conformity of the high-risk AI system with the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2, after all other reasonable means to verify conformity have been exhausted and have proven to be insufficient, and upon a reasoned request, the notified body shall also be granted access to the training and trained models of the AI system, including its relevant parameters. Such access shall be subject to existing Union law on the protection of intellectual property and trade secrets.

4.6.

The decision of the notified body shall be notified to the provider or its authorised representative. The notification shall contain the conclusions of the assessment of the technical documentation and the reasoned assessment decision.

Where the AI system is in conformity with the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2, the notified body shall issue a Union technical documentation assessment certificate. The certificate shall indicate the name and address of the provider, the conclusions of the examination, the conditions (if any) for its validity and the data necessary for the identification of the AI system.

The certificate and its annexes shall contain all relevant information to allow the conformity of the AI system to be evaluated, and to allow for control of the AI system while in use, where applicable.

Where the AI system is not in conformity with the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2, the notified body shall refuse to issue a Union technical documentation assessment certificate and shall inform the applicant accordingly, giving detailed reasons for its refusal.

Where the AI system does not meet the requirement relating to the data used to train it, re-training of the AI system will be needed prior to the application for a new conformity assessment. In this case, the reasoned assessment decision of the notified body refusing to issue the Union technical documentation assessment certificate shall contain specific considerations on the quality data used to train the AI system, in particular on the reasons for non-compliance.

4.7.

Any change to the AI system that could affect the compliance of the AI system with the requirements or its intended purpose shall be assessed by the notified body which issued the Union technical documentation assessment certificate. The provider shall inform such notified body of its intention to introduce any of the abovementioned changes, or if it otherwise becomes aware of the occurrence of such changes. The intended changes shall be assessed by the notified body, which shall decide whether those changes require a new conformity assessment in accordance with