Art. 56 GDPRCompetence of the lead supervisory authority

Without prejudice to

Article 55

, the supervisory authority of the main establishment or of the single establishment of the controller or processor shall be competent to act as lead supervisory authority for the cross-border processing carried out by that controller or processor in accordance with the procedure provided in

Article 60

.

By derogation from paragraph 1, each supervisory authority shall be competent to handle a complaint lodged with it or a possible infringement of this Regulation, if the subject matter relates only to an establishment in its Member State or substantially affects data subjects only in its Member State.

1

In the cases referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, the supervisory authority shall inform the lead supervisory authority without delay on that matter.

2

Within a period of three weeks after being informed the lead supervisory authority shall decide whether or not it will handle the case in accordance with the procedure provided in

Article 60

, taking into account whether or not there is an establishment of the controller or processor in the Member State of which the supervisory authority informed it.

1

Where the lead supervisory authority decides to handle the case, the procedure provided in

Article 60

shall apply.

2

The supervisory authority which informed the lead supervisory authority may submit to the lead supervisory authority a draft for a decision.

3

The lead supervisory authority shall take utmost account of that draft when preparing the draft decision referred to in

Article 60

(3).

Where the lead supervisory authority decides not to handle the case, the supervisory authority which informed the lead supervisory authority shall handle it according to

Articles 61

and

62

.

The lead supervisory authority shall be the sole interlocutor of the controller or processor for the cross-border processing carried out by that controller or processor.

Suitable Recitals

(

124

) Lead Authority Regarding Processing in Several Member States

(

127

) Information of the Supervisory Authority Regarding Local Processing

(

128

) Responsibility Regarding Processing in the Public Interest

←

Art. 55 GDPR

Art. 57 GDPR

→

GDPR

Table of contents

Report error